



Network Working Group                                           J. Arkko
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Best Current Practice                         T. Hardie
Expires: 9 January 2022                                            Cisco
                                                                T. Pauly
                                                                   Apple
                                                            M. Kühlewind
                                                                Ericsson
                                                             8 July 2021


Considerations on Application - Network Collaboration Using Path Signals
                draft-iab-path-signals-collaboration-00

Abstract

   Encryption and other security mechanisms are on the rise on all
   layers of the stack, protecting user data and making network
   operations more secured.  Further, encryption is also a tool to
   address ossification that has been observed on various layers of the
   stack over time.  Separation of functions into layers and enforcement
   of layer boundaries based on encryption supports selected exposure to
   those entities that are addressed by a function on a certain layer.
   A clear separation supports innovation and also enables new
   opportunities for collaborative functions.  RFC8558 describes path
   signals as messages to or from on-path elements.  This document
   states principles for designing mechanisms that use or provide path
   signals and calls for actions on specific valuable cases.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 January 2022.






Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2021 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Past Guidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Problems with existing implicit signals . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Parties Need to Consent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.2.  Nature of Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Authenticating Discussion Partners  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.4.  Authentication does not equal Trust . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.5.  Granularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   5.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

1.  Introduction

   Encryption, besides its important role in security in general,
   provides a tool to control information access and protects again
   ossification by avoiding unintended dependencies and requiring active
   maintenance.  The increased deployment of encryption provides an
   opportunity to reconsider parts of Internet architecture that have
   rather used implicit derivation of input signals for on-path
   functions than explicit signaling, as recommended by RFC8558.

   [RFC8558] defines the term path signals as signals to or from on-path
   elements.  Today path signals are often implicit, e.g. derived from
   in-clear end-to-end information by e.g. examining transport
   protocols.  For instance, on-path elements use various fields of the
   TCP header [RFC0793] to derive information about end-to-end latency
   as well as congestion.  These techniques have evolved because the
   information was simply available and use of this information is
   easier and therefore also cheaper than any explicit and potentially
   complex cooperative approach.



Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


   As such, applications and networks have evolved their interaction
   without comprehensive design for how this interaction should happen
   or which information would be desired for a certain function.  This
   has lead to a situation where sometimes information is used that
   maybe incomplete or incorrect or often indirectly only derives the
   information that was actually desired.  Further, dependencies on
   information and mechanisms that were designed for a different
   function limits the evolvability of the original intends.

   Increased deployment of encryption can and will change this
   situation.  E.g.  QUIC replaces TCP for various application and
   protects all end-to-end signals to only be accessible by the
   endpoint, ensuring evolvability [RFC9000].  QUIC does expose
   information dedicated for on-path elements to consume by design
   explicit signal for specific use cases, such as the Spin bit for
   latency measurements or connection ID that can be used by load
   balancers [I-D.ietf-quic-manageability] but information is limited to
   only those use cases.  Each new use cases requires additional action.

   Such explicit signals that are specifically designed for the use of
   on-path function, while all other information is appropriately
   protected, enables an architecturally clean approach with the aims to
   use and manage the existing network infrastructure most efficiently
   as well as improve the quality of experience for those this
   technology is build for - the user.

   This draft then discusses different approaches for explicit
   collaboration and provides guidance on architectural principles to
   design new mechanisms.

2.  Past Guidance

   Incentives are a well understood problem in general but perhaps not
   fully internalised for various designs attempting to establish
   collaboration between applications and path elements.  The principle
   is that both receiver and sender of information must acquire tangible
   and immediate benefits from the communication, such as improved
   performance,

   A related issue is understanding whether a business model or
   ecosystem change is needed.  Some designs may work well without any
   monetary or payment or cross-administrative domains agreements.  For
   instance, I could ask my packets to be prioritised relative to each
   other and that shouldn't affect anything else.  Some other designs
   may require a matching business ecosystem change to support what is
   being proposed, and may be much harder to achieve.  For instance,
   requesting prioritisation over other people's traffic may imply that




Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


   you have to pay for that which may not be easy even for a single
   provider let alone across many.

   But on to more technical aspects.

   The main guidance in [RFC8558] is to be aware that implicit signals
   will be used whether intended or not.  Protocol designers should
   consider either hiding these signals when the information should not
   be visible, or using explicit signals when it should be.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-what-not-to-do] discusses many past failure cases, a
   catalogue of past issues to avoid.  It also provides relevant
   guidelines for new work, from discussion of incentives to more
   specific observations, such as the need for outperforming end-to-end
   mechanisms (Section 4.4), considering the need for per-connection
   state (Section 4.6), and so on.

   There are also more general guidance documents, e.g., [RFC5218]
   discusses protocol successes and failures, and provides general
   advice on incremental deployability etc.  Internet Technology
   Adoption and Transition (ITAT) workshop report [RFC7305] is also
   recommended reading on this same general topic.  And [RFC6709]
   discusses protocol extensibility, and provides general advice on the
   importance of global interoperability and so on.

3.  Problems with existing implicit signals

   This kind of interaction ends up having several negative effects:

   *  Ossifying protocols by introducing unintended parties that may not
      be updating

   *  Creating systemic incentives against deploying more secure or
      private versions of protocols

   *  Basing network behaviour on information that may be incomplete or
      incorrect

   *  Creating a model where network entities expect to be able to use
      rich information about sessions passing through

   For instance, features such as DNS resolution or TLS setup have been
   used beyond their original intent, such as name filtering, MAC
   addresses used for access control, captive portal implementations
   that employ taking over cleartext HTTP sessions, and so on.






Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


4.  Principles

   This section attempts to provide some architecture-level principles
   that would help future designers, explain past issues and recommend
   useful models to apply.

   ...

   A large number of our protocol mechanisms today fall into one of two
   categories: authenticated and private communication that is only
   visible by the end-to-end nodes; and unauthenticated public
   communication that is visible to all nodes on a path.  RFC 8558
   explores the line between data that is protected and path signals.

   There is a danger in taking a position that is too extreme towards
   either exposing all information to the path, or hiding all
   information from the path.  Exposed information encourages pervasive
   monitoring, which is described in RFC 7258.  But a lack of all path
   signaling, on the other hand, may be harmful to network management
   and the ability for networks to provide useful services.  There are
   many cases where elements on the network path can provide beneficial
   services, but only if they can coordinate with the endpoints.  This
   tradeoff between privacy and network functions has in some cases led
   to an adversarial stance between privacy and the ability for the
   network path to provide intended functions.

   One way to resolve this conflict is to add more explicit trust and
   coordination between endpoints and network devices.  VPNs are a good
   example of a case where there is an explicit authentication and
   negotiation with a network path element that's used to optimize
   behavior or gain access to specific resources.

   The goal of improving privacy and trust on the Internet does not
   necessarily need to remove the ability for network elements to
   perform beneficial functions.  We should instead improve the way that
   these functions are achieved.  Our goals should be: - To ensure that
   information is distributed intentionally, not accidentally, as noted
   in [RFC8558]; - To understand the privacy and other implications of
   any distributed information; and - To gate the distribution of
   information on the consent of the relevant parties

   These goals for distribution apply equally to senders, receivers, and
   path elements.

   We can establish some basic questions that any new network path
   functions should consider: - What is the minimum set of entities that
   need to be involved in order to perform this function? - What is the
   minimum information each entity in this set needs to perform its part



Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


   of the function correctly and reliably? - Which entities must consent
   to each piece of information that is shared?

   Consent and trust must determine the distribution of information.
   The set of entities that need to consent is determined by the scope
   and specificity of the information being shared.

   If we look at many of the ways network path functions are achieved
   today, we find that many if not most of them fall short the standard
   set up by the questions above.  Too often, they rely on information
   being sent without limiting the scope of distribution or providing
   any negotiation or consent.

   Going forward, new standards work in the IETF needs to focus on
   addressing this gap by providing better alternatives and mechanisms
   for providing path functions.  Note that not all of these functions
   can be achieved in a way that preserves a high level of user privacy
   from the network; in such cases, it is incumbent upon us to not
   ignore the use case, but instead to define the high bar for consent
   and trust, and thus define a limited applicability for those
   functions.

4.1.  Parties Need to Consent

   ...

4.2.  Nature of Information

   One common problem in finding a workable solution for network -
   application collaboration is information leakage.  All parties are
   afraid of either their own propietary information or the users' data
   leaking to others.  Oddly enough, no one is usually worried about
   users' data leaking to themselves, but we digress. :-)

   [I-D.per-app-networking-considerations] discusses how applications
   may be identified through collaboration mechanisms.  This can be
   harmful, as in extreme cases it may lead to undesirable
   prioritization decisions or even blocking certain applications.
   [I-D.per-app-networking-considerations] explains how to reduce the
   latter problem by categories or requested service rather than
   specific application identity, such as providing the category "video
   call service" rather than the name of a particular application
   performing conference call or video call services.  This points to a
   more general principle of information specificity, providing only the
   information that is needed for the other party to perform the
   collaboration task that is desired by this party, and not more.  This
   applies to information sent by an application about itself,
   information sent about users, or information sent by the network.



Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


   An architecture can follow the guideline from RFC 8558 in using
   explicit signals, but still fail to differentiate properly between
   information that should be kept private and information that should
   be shared.

   In looking at what information can or cannot easily be passed, we can
   look at both information from the network to the application, and
   from the application to the network.

   For the application to the network direction, user-identifying
   information can be problematic for privacy and tracking reasons.
   Similarly, application identity can be problematic, if it might form
   the basis for prioritization or discrimination that the that
   application provider may not wish to happen.  It may also have
   undesirable economic consequences, such as extra charges for the
   consumer from a priority service where a regular service would have
   worked.

   On the other hand, as noted above, information about general classes
   of applications may be desirable to be given by application
   providers, if it enables prioritization that would improve service,
   e.g., differentiation between interactive and non-interactive
   services.

   For the network to application direction there's less directly
   sensitive information.  Various network conditions, predictive
   bandwidth and latency capabilities, and so on might be attractive
   information that applications can use to determine, for instance,
   optimal strategies for changing codecs.

   However, care needs to be take to ensure that neither private
   information about the individual user (such as user's physical
   location) is not indirectly exposed through this information.
   Similarly, this information should not form a mechanism to provide a
   side-channel into what other users are doing.

   While information needs to be specific and provided on a per-need
   basis, it should also be declarative rather than specify some
   actions.  The information should show what the application needs, for
   instance, rather than requiring the path elements to behave in some
   specific fashion.

   One should also consider ways to verify the provided information, or
   understand the implications if the information provided from the
   application may not be correct, or has been modified.






Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


4.3.  Authenticating Discussion Partners

   (even outside the client and server)

   ...

4.4.  Authentication does not equal Trust

   ...

4.5.  Granularity

   In the IAB Covid-19 Network Impacts workshop Jana Iyengar brought up
   the granularity of operations [I-D.iab-covid19-workshop].  There are
   many reasons why per-flow designs are problematic: scalability, need
   to release information about individual user's individual activities,
   etc.  Perhaps designs that work on aggregates would work better.

5.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank everyone at the IETF, the IAB, and
   our day jobs for interesting thoughts and proposals in this space.
   Fragments of this document were also in
   [I-D.per-app-networking-considerations] and
   [I-D.arkko-path-signals-information] that were published earlier.

6.  Informative References

   [I-D.arkko-path-signals-information]
              Arkko, J., "Considerations on Information Passed between
              Networks and Applications", Work in Progress, Internet-
              Draft, draft-arkko-path-signals-information-00, 22
              February 2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
              arkko-path-signals-information-00.txt>.

   [I-D.iab-covid19-workshop]
              Arkko, J., Farrell, S., Kühlewind, M., and C. Perkins,
              "Report from the IAB COVID-19 Network Impacts Workshop
              2020", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-iab-
              covid19-workshop-03, 5 May 2021,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-iab-covid19-
              workshop-03.txt>.

   [I-D.ietf-quic-manageability]
              Kuehlewind, M. and B. Trammell, "Manageability of the QUIC
              Transport Protocol", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft,
              draft-ietf-quic-manageability-12, 30 June 2021,




Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-ietf-quic-
              manageability-12.txt>.

   [I-D.irtf-panrg-what-not-to-do]
              Dawkins, S., "Path Aware Networking: Obstacles to
              Deployment (A Bestiary of Roads Not Taken)", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-panrg-what-not-to-do-
              19, 26 March 2021, <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
              irtf-panrg-what-not-to-do-19.txt>.

   [I-D.per-app-networking-considerations]
              Colitti, L. and T. Pauly, "Per-Application Networking
              Considerations", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              per-app-networking-considerations-00, 15 November 2020,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-per-app-networking-
              considerations-00.txt>.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", STD 7,
              RFC 793, DOI 10.17487/RFC0793, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc793>.

   [RFC5218]  Thaler, D. and B. Aboba, "What Makes for a Successful
              Protocol?", RFC 5218, DOI 10.17487/RFC5218, July 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5218>.

   [RFC6709]  Carpenter, B., Aboba, B., Ed., and S. Cheshire, "Design
              Considerations for Protocol Extensions", RFC 6709,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6709, September 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6709>.

   [RFC7305]  Lear, E., Ed., "Report from the IAB Workshop on Internet
              Technology Adoption and Transition (ITAT)", RFC 7305,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7305, July 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7305>.

   [RFC8558]  Hardie, T., Ed., "Transport Protocol Path Signals",
              RFC 8558, DOI 10.17487/RFC8558, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8558>.

   [RFC9000]  Iyengar, J., Ed. and M. Thomson, Ed., "QUIC: A UDP-Based
              Multiplexed and Secure Transport", RFC 9000,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9000, May 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9000>.

Authors' Addresses

   Jari Arkko




Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             Path Signals Collab                 July 2021


   Ericsson

   Email: jari.arkko@ericsson.com


   Ted Hardie
   Cisco

   Email: ted.ietf@gmail.com


   Tommy Pauly
   Apple

   Email: tpauly@apple.com


   Mirja Kühlewind
   Ericsson

   Email: mirja.kuehlewind@ericsson.com






























Arkko, et al.            Expires 9 January 2022                [Page 10]
